keycloak self assesment document (#417)
cncf/sig-security: assessments/projects/keycloak/self-assessment.md

*   Security Degradation
    *   It is worth distinguishing compromising Keycloak itself and compromising applications secured with Keycloak (for example by hijacking session token). The latter doesn’t need to lead to the former while being the core goal of the attacker. Resulting in compromising only one client or particular users while not compromising IdP itself.  
    *   Rendering server unavailable
        *   Potentially easiest attack on the server is DDOS impacting its availability. 
        *   Impact
            *   End users not able to authenticate to applications
            *   Applications not being able to reach out to server for additional validation calls. At minimum they should still be able to verify already issued tokens using cached public key from the server and make authorization decisions based on existing included claims. Although new refreshed access tokens won’t be possible to issued impacting availability of applications to end users. 
        *   Prevention and mitigation mechanisms
            *   Implementing proper HA deployment with Clustering or even Datacenter duplication or distribution

>             *   Fronting Keycloak with proper rate limiting solutions at Load Balancer or Firewall level

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            *   Fronting Keycloak with proper rate limiting solutions at the Load Balancer or Firewall level
```

    *   Impacting server integrity and sensitive data Exposure
        *   Keycloak as an Identity Provider contains user sensitive data. 
        *   Impact

>             *   At different level of granularity gaining access to data in the server can be very impactful 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            *   At different levels of granularity, gaining access to data in the server can be very impactful 
```

            *   User access - leaking profile information and allowing to reset password and take over given user accounts. Although for user triggered password reset email validation can provide necessary mitigation
            *   Session takeover - getting access to user session can allow attacker to take over access to given application and related resources
            *   Gaining administrator access to the master realm is a potentially catastrophic event as it gives countless attack venues to exploit.
        *   Prevention and mitigation mechanisms

>             *   Not leveraging the master realm administrator account. Instead  creating dedicated realms with administrator accounts containing subset of permissions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            *   Not leveraging the master realm administrator account. Instead  creating dedicated realms with administrator accounts containing a subset of permissions
```

            *   Server [Key rotation](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#rotating-keys). Ability to introduce new server keys and invalidate old ones in case leak has been detected
            *   User session invalidation and [refresh token revocation policy ](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#_revocation-policy)allowing to not trust refresh tokens issued earlier then given timestamp

>             *   TLS preventing Man in The Middle attacks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            *   TLS preventing Man-in-the-Middle attacks
```

>             *   MFA and W3C WebAuthentication - providing Strong Customer Authentication means both for end users and Keycloak administrators. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            *   MFA and W3C WebAuthentication - providing Strong Customer Authentication mechanisms for end users and Keycloak administrators. 
```

            *   [Password Credentials hashing](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#password-database-compromised) with pluggable SPIs to integrate third party vaults

>             *   [Limiting token audience](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#limit-token-audience) allowing to potentially prevent reusing leaked application session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            *   [Limiting token audience](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#limit-token-audience) to allow potential reuse prevention of leaked application sessions.
```

            *   Possibility to introduce database encryption at RDBMs level
            *   [Brute force detection](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#password-guess-brute-force-attacks) - basic mechanism preventing password guessing techniques. 

>             *   Keycloak follows best practice to try to not leak any indicator about which software version given running instance is using. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            *   Keycloak follows best practices to try to not leak any indicator about which software version the given running instance is using. 
```

        *   _You can also mitigate against leaked authorization codes by applying PKCE to clients. See [Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE)](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#_proof-key-for-code-exchange) to learn how.”_
    *   _Eg. _Authorization Services and [handling custom polices implemented in JavaScript](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/authorization_services/index.html#_policy_js)
        *   _“By default, JavaScript Policies can not be uploaded to the server. You should prefer deploying your JS Policies directly to the server as described in [JavaScript Providers](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_development/#_script_providers). If you still want to use the Keycloak Administration Console to manage your JS policies you should enable the ‘Upload Scripts’ feature.”_
        *   This is done to mitigate any issues around handling (escaping/sandboxing) custom JavaScript code for those policies within the browser (within Admin UI).  
*   User impersonation

>     *   Server provides ability for the administrator with a given set of permissions to [impersonate a particular user](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#impersonation) and act on his behalf. Security of aspects of it can be configured on few different levels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Server provides ability for the administrator with a given set of permissions to [impersonate a particular user](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#impersonation) and act on their behalf. Security of aspects of this can be configured on few different levels
```

    *   Impersonation can be [disabled at the server instance level](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_installation/#profiles) as part of startup configuration with: “-Dkeycloak.profile.feature.impersonation=disabled” option. This has been introduced deliberately at this level understanding some organizations would prefer not having such powerful capability enabled at all. 

>     *   Impersonation can be [disabled at the realm level ](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#_per_realm_admin_permissions)by removing “Impersonation” role for given admin account

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Impersonation can be [disabled at the realm level ](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#_per_realm_admin_permissions)by removing the “Impersonation” role for given admin account
```

>     *   At the auditing level there is dedicated “Impersonate” and “Impersonate_Error” event to capture such activity for audit purposes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   At the auditing level there are dedicated “Impersonate” and “Impersonate_Error” events to capture such activity for audit purposes
```

    *   Impersonated user session[ provide details](https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/#_protocol-mappers_oidc-user-session-note-mappers) on “Impersonator” - keeping track of who initiated impersonated session on behalf of given user
*   Typical configuration mistakes to avoid

>     *   Man In the Middle - caution during server provisioning. There are means introduced to ensure that the initial administrator password is not leaked (no defaults, required to be set via localhost, leveraging scripts provided in the server to do so). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Man-In-the Middle - caution during server provisioning. There are means introduced to ensure that the initial administrator password is not leaked (no defaults, required to be set via localhost, leveraging scripts provided in the server to do so). 
```

>     *   Lack of TLS - which can lead to Man in the Middle and which presence is required by OAuth2 specification. Establishing TLS for the server during provisioning is a must for production deployment. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Lack of TLS - which can lead to a Man-in-the-Middle attack.  TLS is required by the OAuth2 specification. Establishing TLS for the server during provisioning is a must for production deployments. 
```

>     *   Setting weak password for admin - there is very flexible and powerful password strength policy validation although it is not enabled by default to enforce initial one for admin account

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Setting a weak password for admin - there is a very flexible and powerful password strength policy validation although it is not enabled by default to enforce initial one for admin account
```

    *   Using master realm for applications and administrator user within master realm for all provisioning and configuration purposes. This is equivalent to using or running under a “root” account in linux. 

>     *   Setting very long token lifespans for “convenience”. While reducing back and forth communication between application and server it increases the risk of session takeover. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Setting very long token lifespans for “convenience”. Although this reduces back and forth communication between the application and the server, it increases the risk of session takeover. 
```

        *   Disabling or not enabling certain features like password validation, brute force attacks, event logging etc. 
    *   Not updating the server and not keeping track or keeping up with CVEs. 
    *   Taking password hashing iterations to extreme - either reducing or increasing too much. Making a bad tradeoff between performance and security impact. 
    *   Not maintaining proper size of information in the token - possibly adding huge performance impact on memory consumption leading to the server being less prone on the availability front. 
    *   Not being aware or following general security best practices like enforcing Multi Factor Authentication or certain password entropy. 
    *   Not limiting the token audience and the scope of applications to prevent API misuse.
*   OAuth 2.0 and OpenID Connect area is moving ahead. 
    *   [https://aaronparecki.com/2019/12/12/21/its-time-for-oauth-2-dot-1](https://aaronparecki.com/2019/12/12/21/its-time-for-oauth-2-dot-1)
    *   [https://aaronparecki.com/2020/03/11/14/oauth-2-1](https://aaronparecki.com/2020/03/11/14/oauth-2-1)

>     *   Both applications and Keycloak need to be ongoingly monitored and updated to follow current best practices and new additions or recommendations. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Both applications and Keycloak need to be monitored and updated on an ongoing basis to follow current best practices and new additions or recommendations. 
```

## 
**Secure Development Practices**

*   Without tests and documentation, any code does not get merged.

> *   PR reviews by senior maintainers and successful CI runs are required for merging. This at times leads to longer [PR merging times and review queue](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/pulls). With current project size and adoption in the industry it is a balancing act. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   PR reviews by senior maintainers and successful CI runs are required for merging. This at times leads to longer [PR merging times and  a longer review queue](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak/pulls). With current project size and adoption in the industry it is a balancing act. 
```

    *   Design proposals: \
[https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-community/tree/master/design](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-community/tree/master/design)
*   Project goes against NIH mindset and leverages trusted software components and libraries
    *   It leverages WildFly Application Server as a runtime and closely following latest releases to consume all new patches: [https://wildfly.org](https://wildfly.org/) 
        *   This is upstream technology behind Red Hat Enterprise Application Server with high profile and high scale deployments. 
    *   Whenever possible leverages community collaboration with wider scrutiny. 
        *   Latest example is W3C WebAuthn work where Keycloak project teamed up with community behind WebAuthn4J project:
            *   [https://github.com/webauthn4j/webauthn4j](https://github.com/webauthn4j/webauthn4j) 
*   Community communication channels
    *   [https://www.keycloak.org/community](https://www.keycloak.org/community)
*   Dedicated security issue reporting process [https://www.keycloak.org/security.html](https://www.keycloak.org/security.html)

> *   Cloud Native ecosystem standardized on OAuth 2.0/OpenID Connect and JWT tokens. There is no other standard currently being utilized for those use cases. OpenID Connect Authorization Service is a critical component of any deployment in Cloud Native space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Cloud Native ecosystem standardized on OAuth 2.0/OpenID Connect and JWT tokens. There is no other standard currently being utilized for those use cases. OpenID Connect Authorization Service is a critical component of any deployment in the Cloud Native space.
```

>     *   Kubernetes embraces it for API Server security and calls out Keycloak (among other options) in documentation. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Kubernetes embraces Keycloak for API Server security and calls out Keycloak (among other options) in it's documentation. 
```

>     *   Istio Service Mesh embraces OpenID Connect for end user authentication. In Keycloak community survey over 60% of claimed deployments were done in Cloud related environments (Kubernetes, OpenShift, Public Cloud, Containers) vs only around 30% were traditional ZIP distribution with JVM. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Istio Service Mesh embraces OpenID Connect for end user authentication. In Keycloak's community survey, over 60% of claimed deployments were done in Cloud related environments (Kubernetes, OpenShift, Public Cloud, Containers) vs only around 30% were traditional ZIP distribution with JVM. 
```

>     *   Contributions which are done also indicate it 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    *   Existing contributions to the project indicate this
```

        *   [https://www.slideshare.net/ssuserbeb7c0/apidays-paris-2019-financialgrade-api-securityprofile](https://www.slideshare.net/ssuserbeb7c0/apidays-paris-2019-financialgrade-api-securityprofile)
        *   [https://www.slideshare.net/YuichiNakamura10/implementing-security-requirements-for-banking-api-system-using-open-source-software-oss](https://www.slideshare.net/YuichiNakamura10/implementing-security-requirements-for-banking-api-system-using-open-source-software-oss)"
    *   **NTT Communications** : "+1 Yes, Keycloak is very promising and deserves it. It is easy to use, well-documented, and has enough features to be used in cloud native environment."
    *   **Nomura Research Institute, Ltd**. : "We're using keycloak in cloud native environment, including k8s and so on."

> *   Additional real world deployments team is aware of:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   Additional real world deployments the Keycloak team is aware of:
```
